All variables in a program may not be accessible at all locations in that program. Part(s) of the program within which the variable name is legal and
accessible, is called the scope of the variable. A variable will only be visible to and accessible by the code blocks in its scope.

There are broadly two kinds of scopes in Python − 

     ● Global scope

     ● Local scope

 

Global Scope :

  

A variable/name declared in the top-level segment (__main__) of a program is said to have a global scope and is usable inside the whole program (Can be accessed
from anywhere in the program).

In Python, a variable declared outside a function is known as a global variable. This means that a global variable can be accessed from inside or outside of the function.

 

Creating a Global Variable

 

Consider the given code snippet:

 

x = "Global Variable" 
def foo(): 
    print("Value of x: ", x) 
foo()

 

Here, we created a global variable x = "Global Variable". Then, we created a function foo to print the value of the global variable from inside the function.
We get the output : 

 

Global Variable

 

Thus we can conclude that we can access a global variable from inside any function.

What if you want to change the value of a Global Variable from inside a function?

 

Consider the code snippet:

 

x = "Global Variable" 
def foo(): 
    print("Value of x: ", x) 
foo()

 

In this code block, we tried to update the value of the global variable x. We get an output as:

 

UnboundLocalError: local variable 'x' referenced before assignment

 

This happens because, when the command x=x-1, is interpreted, Python treats this x as a local variable and we have not defined any local variable x inside
the function foo().

Local Scope:

 

The variables which are defined inside a function body have a local scope. This implies that local variables can be accessed only inside the function
in which they are declared.

 
Creating a Local Variable

 

We declare a local variable inside a function. Consider the given function definition:

 

def func():
    name = "Shivam Kumar Singh"
	print(name)

func()

 

We get the output as:

 

Shivam Kumar Singh

 
Accessing A Local Variable Outside The Scope

 

def func():
    name = "Shivam Kumar Singh"

func()
print(name)

 

In the above code, we declared a local variable y inside the function foo(), and then we tried to access it from outside the function. We get the output as:

 

NameError: name 'name' is not defined

 

We get an error because the lifetime of a local variable is the function it is defined in.

 

Outside the function, the variable does not exist and cannot be accessed. In other words, a variable cannot be accessed outside its scope.

 
The Lifetime of a Variable

 

The time for which the variable exists in memory is called the lifetime of that variable:

       ● The lifetime of a Global variable is the entire program run (i.e., they live in the

          memory as long as the program is being executed).

       ● The lifetime of a Local variable is their function’s run (i.e., as long as their function

           is being executed).
 Global Variable And Local Variable With The Same Name

 

Consider the code given:

 

val = 1 
def func():
  val = 50
  print("Value of Local variable:", val)
 
func() 
print("Value of Global Variable:", val)

 

In this, we have declared a global variable val = 1 outside the function func(). Now, we re-declared a local variable inside the function func() with the same name val.
Now, we try to print the values of val, inside, and outside the function. We observe the following output:

 

Value of Local variable:: 50
Value of Global variable:: 1

 

In the above code,  both global and local variables have the same name val. On printing the value of val we get a different result, because the variables
have been declared in different scopes, i.e., the local scope inside func() and global scope outside func().

 

When we print the value of the variable inside func() it outputs Value of Local variable: 10. This is the local scope of the variable. In the local scope, 
it prints the value that it has been assigned inside the function.

 

Similarly, when we print the variable outside func(), it outputs Value of Global variable: 5. This is the global scope of the variable, and the value of the
global variable val is printed.
